---
template: blog-post
title: The Importance of Typography in Web Development
slug: typography
date: 2022-02-13 19:35
description: typography post
featuredImage: /assets/brett-jordan-vypvtz5p8d4-unsplash.jpg
---
When it comes to web design and what makes certain webpages better than others there are many different aspects that have to be considered. One of these aspects is your typography/the way you style the text on your website. On a basic level you can slap some simple css on your page and call it a day, and yeah maybe it looks decent, maybe it doesn’t. Either way, there is so much more than other websites do that just make them look much more professional. When it comes to those more professional websites, one of the main things that attracts people to them is their readability. By optimizing your typography, you are not only able to optimize readability though, but you can also optimize accessibility, usability, and the overall graphic balance of your website.

One the basic level of typography, you have your fonts and the sizes you use for them. Your main goal when picking fonts to use on your page should be to choose the minimal fonts that you can. You don’t have 10, 15 different fonts across your website because the inconsistency and the readability will be horrendous. You should try to pick 2 fonts, maybe 3 if you absolutely need and stick with them. You should also try to use “standard fonts” like Serif, Sans-serif, Script, or Display fonts. These fonts are not only consistently readable, but they also have their best uses. For example, Serif fonts are perfect for when you want easily readable small text, but if you need something that is larger and bolder, use Sans-serif fonts. The other very important thing that you need to consider is whether or not your fonts that your choose work well at various sizes. If you pick something that is perfect at the size you will normally use it at, but let’s say 5% of the time it isn’t that readable at a larger size, than it is a bad font to use. You should aim to have a font that will be readable 100% of the time that you will use it.

The next big thing you need to consider when it comes to your website is the limit line length. Since readability is the goal, you have to consider what is too long for a line of text. You don’t want the design of your site to decide the width of your text because if you do that, then it will be nearly impossible for people to read. You should aim to have your text always be legible. Advice from the Baymard Institute is for the general sense, you should aim for between 40 to 60 character per line if you want good readability. But, when it comes to mobile devices you should actually aim for between 30 and 40 characters for a line since it will be a smaller width of the screen.

You should also definitely avoid using all caps in your text unless it’s for things like acronyms or logos so it’s not forcefully difficult to read. For example, THIS MUST BE AN ABSOLUTE PAIN TO READ SINCE I TYPED IT OUT IN ALL CAPS AND IT’S AS IF I AM SCREAMING AT YOU AND THERE IS SO MUCH LARGE TEXT THAT IT’S NOT COMFORTABLE TO READ. IT’S AS IF I SAID I DON’T CARE WHO IS READING THIS, I AM DOING THIS BECAUSE I FEEL LIKE IT AND I CAN SINCE IT’S MY SITE. See how annoying and difficult that was to read, and that was only 2 sentences, imagine if a whole paragraph was designed like that. It would be horrendous to read, so make sure to not overuse capitalization. On top of that you want to make sure your lines of text are spaced out just enough that they aren’t right on top of each other, but also not too much that your eyes have to jump too much to get the next line since it will become a struggle to read your site. A good rule of thumb is to set your leading not about 30% more than the character height to set the vertical white space between lines of text to a perfect size.

The last major thing to note is to make sure you have enough color contrast so that as many people as possible can read your site. W3C recommends that you have at least 4.5:1 as the contrast ratio for small text against its background and 3:1 for large text (14pt bold/18pt regular). You should also avoid coloring text in red or green because of those who are colorblind, but if you plan to use it for important information make sure to all other cues to help distinguish that information. 

If you would like to read more into why typography is important in web development and how to achieve good typography check out these site: [WebFX](https://www.webfx.com/blog/web-design/a-basic-look-at-typography-in-web-design/), [UXPlanet](https://uxplanet.org/10-tips-on-typography-in-web-design-13a378f4aa0d), and [Adobe](https://xd.adobe.com/ideas/principles/web-design/best-modern-fonts-for-websites/) 
